.Dd December 22, 2008
.Os Ubuntu
.ds volume-operating-system Ubuntu
.Dt OEM\-CONFIG\-FIRSTBOOT 8
.Sh NAME
.Nm oem\-config\-firstboot
.Nd run oem\-config on first boot after shipping to end user
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Fl debug
.Op Fl Fl automatic
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
performs some minor set-up before calling
.Xr oem\-config 8
(possibly via
.Xr oem\-config\-dm 8 )
to ask configuration questions of the end user.
It will call
.Xr oem\-config 8
up to five times until it succeeds (exiting zero).
If it succeeds, it will clean up the temporary OEM configuration user
created during initial installation, and arrange for
.Nm
not to be run again.
If it fails every time, it will drop to a shell to help the end user fix
things up.
.Pp
.Nm
is suitable for calling from an init script, and is not intended to be run
directly by users.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width 4n
.It Fl d , Fl Fl debug
Run in debugging mode, sending verbose information to
.Pa /var/log/oem\-config.log
that may be useful to developers.
.Em Note that passwords will be logged in debugging mode!
.Pp
In debugging mode,
.Nm
will only try to run
.Xr oem\-config 8
once, and will not provide a panic shell on failure.
.It Fl Fl automatic
Run in automatic mode, read a preseed file, quietly apply all preseeded
values and do not ask any questions for already preseeded answers.
If the option
.Ic automatic\-oem\-config
is set on the kernel command line at boot time, this option is used automatically.
.El
.Sh AUTHOR
.An Colin Watson Aq cjwatson@ubuntu.com
.Pp
.An -nosplit
.Ic oem\-config
is copyright \(co 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008
.An Canonical Ltd . ,
and
copyright \(co 2006, 2007
.An Anirudh Ramesh .
See the GNU General Public License version 2 or later for copying
conditions.
A copy of the GNU General Public License is available in
.Pa /usr/share/common\-licenses/GPL .
