.Dd August 9, 2007
.Os Ubuntu
.ds volume-operating-system Ubuntu
.Dt UBIQUITY 8
.Sh NAME
.Nm ubiquity
.Nd install Ubuntu from a live CD
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Fl desktop Ar file
.Op Fl Fl debug
.Op Fl Fl pdb
.Op Fl Fl cdebconf
.Op Fl Fl automatic
.Op Fl Fl only
.Op Fl Fl query
.Op Ar frontend
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a graphical installer for Ubuntu, written largely in Python, using
.Ic debian\-installer
.No ( Ic d\-i )
as a backend for many of its functions.
It is normally invoked from a desktop icon, and presents a "wizard"-style
graphical user interface.
.Nm
must be run as root, and will escalate privileges for itself using
.Ic gksudo ,
.Ic kdesu ,
.Ic kdesudo ,
or
.Ic sudo
as appropriate.
.Pp
.Nm
has multiple frontends, including one written using GTK+
.No ( Li gtk_ui )
and one written for KDE
.No ( Li kde_ui ) .
The first non-option argument, if any, is interpreted as the name of the
frontend to use.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width 4n
.It Fl Fl desktop Ar file
This option is passed through to
.Ic gksudo
to provide a better description for its privilege-escalation message.
It is only relevant when using the
.Li gtk_ui
frontend.
.It Fl d , Fl Fl debug
Run in debugging mode, sending verbose information to
.Pa /var/log/installer/debug
that may be useful to developers.
(The
.Pa /var/log/syslog
file is usually required in any case, along with
.Pa /var/log/partman
in the case of problems related to partitioning.)
.Em Note that passwords will be logged in debugging mode!
.It Fl Fl pdb
Drop into the Python debugger in the event of a crash.
Only effective if
.Nm
is being run from a terminal.
.It Fl Fl cdebconf
Use
.Ic cdebconf
instead of the traditional Perl
.Ic debconf
implementation.
In future this may provide enough memory efficiency benefits to be made the
default, but for now it is not really worthwhile and is therefore for
experimental use only.
.It Fl Fl automatic
Skip over questions that have been pre-answered by use of a preseed file.
This is useful for unattended installations.
.It Fl Fl only
Tell
.Nm
that it is the only desktop program running so that it can customize its
user interface to better suit a minimal environment.
This allows the installer to be run standalone, reducing memory
requirements.
.It Fl Fl query
Print the frontend that would be used and then exit.
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
Ubiquity was formerly known as "Espresso", and originally as "Ubuntu
Express", which is written and maintained by
.An "Javier Carranza" Aq javier.carranza@interactors.coop
and
.An "Juanje Ojeda Croissier" Aq juanje@interactors.coop .
This version draws on the work done on Ubuntu Express, but was renamed to
avoid confusion, to reduce awkward branding considerations, and because
Ubiquity concentrates on reusing
.Ic debian-installer
code and reducing duplicated translation and branding work as much as
possible.
Ubiquity has now substantially diverged from Ubuntu Express and is an
independent project.
.Pp
.Nm
was mainly developed by
.An "Colin Watson" Aq cjwatson@ubuntu.com
and
.An "Evan Dandrea" Aq ev@ubuntu.com ,
with contributions from many others.
.Pp
The
.Li mythbuntu_ui
frontend was developed by
.An "Mario Limonciello" Aq superm1@ubuntu.com .
