.\"Copyright (C) 2011 Anton Zinoviev <anton@lml.bas.bg>
.\"
.\"Copying and distribution of this file, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted in any medium without royalty provided
.\"the copyright notice and this notice are preserved.  This file is
.\"offered as-is, without any warranty.
.\"
.TH CONSOLE-SETUP 5 2011-03-17 console-setup "Console-setup User's Manual"
.SH NAME
console-setup \- configuration file for setupcon
.SH DESCRIPTION
The file
.B console-setup
specifies the encoding and the font to be used by
.BR setupcon (1)
in order to setup the console.  It can be used also to specify the
keyboard layout but it is not recommended to do so, use
.BR keyboard (5)
instead.
.PP
The font specification consists of three parameters \- codeset, font
face and font size.  The codeset specifies what characters will be
supported by the font.  There isn't one-to-one correspondence between
codeset and encoding, for example the codeset
.B Lat15
is suitable for ISO\ 8859-1, ISO\ 8859-9 and ISO\ 8859-15.  The
codesets are two kinds \- small and big.  Only small codesets are
supported on FreeBSD.
.PP
The font face determines the general look of the font.  Each font face
is available in certain possible sizes.  On FreeBSD only
.BR 8x16 ", " 8x14 " and " 8x8
are valid sizes.  On Linux if framebuffer is not used or
.BR consolechars (1)
is installed instead of
.BR setfont (1),
then the permitted sizes have the form
.RI 8x NUMBER .

.PP
The console driver of FreeBSD permits fonts in different sizes to be
simultaneously loaded.  Which one of them will be actually used
depends on the current video mode.  Therefore, on this platform the
font size specification will be ignored and
.BR setupcon (1)
will load the selected font face in all available sizes.
.PP
The file
.B console-setup
consists of variable settings in
.SM POSIX
format:
.IP
.IR VARIABLE "='" VALUE '
.PP
Only one assignment is allowed per line.  Comments (starting with '#')
are also allowed.

.SH OPTIONS
The following variables can be set.

.TP
.B ACTIVE_CONSOLES
Specifies the device files in
.I /dev
of the virtual terminals to be configured.  File name wild-cards
.RB ( * ",\ " ? )
are allowed.  On Linux usually you can set this to
.B /dev/tty[1-6]
and on FreeBSD a sensible value is
.BR /dev/ttyv[0-8] .
You can assign to this variable also the special value
.BR guess .
It will cause
.BR setupcon (1)
to attempt to guess the active virtual consoles by looking in
configuration files such as
.IR /etc/inittab " and " /etc/ttys .
This guessing is not always reliable.

.TP
.B CHARMAP
Specifies the desired encoding on the console.  Valid values are:
.nh
.BR UTF-8 ,
.BR ARMSCII-8 ,
.BR CP1251 ,
.BR CP1255 ,
.BR CP1256 ,
.BR GEORGIAN-ACADEMY ,
.BR GEORGIAN-PS ,
.BR IBM1133 ,
.BR ISIRI-3342 ,
.BR ISO-8859-1 ,
.BR ISO-8859-2 ,
.BR ISO-8859-3 ,
.BR ISO-8859-4 ,
.BR ISO-8859-5 ,
.BR ISO-8859-6 ,
.BR ISO-8859-7 ,
.BR ISO-8859-8 ,
.BR ISO-8859-9 ,
.BR ISO-8859-10 ,
.BR ISO-8859-11 ,
.BR ISO-8859-13 ,
.BR ISO-8859-14 ,
.BR ISO-8859-15 ,
.BR ISO-8859-16 ,
.BR KOI8-R ,
.BR KOI8-U ,
.BR TIS-620 " and"
.BR VISCII .
.hy
The special value
.B guess
is also recognized in which case the system command
.BR locale (1)
will be used to guess the desired encoding (currently this works
reliably only with
.SM GNU
libc).

.TP
.B CODESET
In most cases the special value
.B guess
can be used here in which case a suitable codeset will be guessed.
The codeset determines which symbols are supported by the font.  Valid
small codesets are:
.nh
.BR Armenian ,
.BR CyrAsia ,
.BR CyrKoi ,
.BR CyrSlav ,
.BR Georgian ,
.BR Greek ,
.BR Hebrew ,
.BR Lao ,
.BR Lat15 ,
.BR Lat2 ,
.BR Lat38 ,
.BR Lat7 " and"
.BR Thai .
.hy
Valid big codesets are:
.nh
.BR Arabic ,
.BR Ethiopian ,
.BR Uni1 ,
.BR Uni2 ,
.BR Uni3 " and"
.BR Vietnamese .
.hy
Only small codesets can be used on FreeBSD.  See below the section
entitled \*(lqCODESETS\*(rq for detailed description of each of these
codesets.

.TP
.BR FONTFACE " and " FONTSIZE
Valid font faces are: 
.nh
.BR VGA " (sizes " 8x8 ", " 8x14 ", " 8x16 ", " 16x28 " and " 16x32 ),
.BR Terminus " (sizes " 6x12 ", " 8x14 ", " 8x16 ", " 10x20 ", " 12x24 ", " 14x28 " and " 16x32 ),
.BR TerminusBold " (sizes " 8x14 ", " 8x16 ", " 10x20 ", " 12x24 ", " 14x28 " and " 16x32 ),
.BR TerminusBoldVGA " (sizes " 8x14 " and " 8x16 ),
and
.BR Fixed " (sizes " 8x13 ", " 8x14 ", " 8x15 ", " 8x16 " and " 8x18 ).
If however
.BR CODESET = Ethiopian ,
then the available font faces are
.BR Goha " and " GohaClassic ,
each in sizes
.BR 8x12 ", " 8x14 " and " 8x16 .
.hy

Set
.B FONTFACE
and
.B FONTSIZE
to empty strings if you want to configure only the keyboard and to
leave the console font unchanged.

.TP
.B VIDEOMODE
Set
.B VIDEOMODE
to an empty string to avoid setting up the video mode.  On FreeBSD you
can run
.in +4n
.nf

vidcontrol -i mode

.fi
.in
in order to see all possible video modes.  On Linux
.BR fbset (1)
is used to configure the video mode but very often this doesn't work
because the default framebuffer driver (VesaFB) is rather limited and
doesn't allow changes of the video mode.

.TP
.BR FONT ", " FONT_MAP " and " CONSOLE_MAP
If set, specify that a non standard font is to be used.  The value of
the variable
.B FONT
consists of one or more space separated font file names.  On Linux,
when the font doesn't contain embedded Unicode map, an external map
can be specified with the variable
.BR FONT_MAP .
The value of
.B CONSOLE_MAP
is a file that specifies a translation map from the user's 8-bit
encoding to Unicode (Linux only) or directly to font positions.

.TP
.BR SCREEN_WIDTH " and " SCREEN_HEIGHT
If set, these variables specify a screen size that
.BR setupcon (1)
will enforce with
.BR stty (1).
This can be useful with some braille devices that are only 40 cells
wide.  The screen size can not exceed what the current screen
resolution can display according to the size of the loaded font.

.TP
.B BEEP
This variable controls the style of the system beep on the console.  When unset or when
.B BEEP=default
no changes to the system beep will be made.  Other possible values of
.B BEEP
are:
.B standard -
set a standard beep;
.B short -
like the standard beep but somewhat shorter;
.B shortest -
even more short, suitable when your work generates lots of beeps;
.B polite -
a very short beep with low frequency, suitable when there are other
people in the room;
.B attention -
a very long beep, suitable when you want to warn yourself about an
occurring event;
.B annoying -
also a long beep, suitable when you want to warn somebody else about
an occurring event; and
.B off -
disable the system beep on the console.

.SH CODESETS
There are two kinds of codesets \- small (up to 256\ symbols) and big
(up to 512\ symbols).  Only small codesets can be used on FreeBSD.
When the screen is in text mode (i.e. framebuffer is not used) then
fonts covering big codesets will reduce the number of available
foreground colors.

.SS Arabic (a big codeset)
Supported languages: Arabic, Kurdish in Iran, Pashto, Persian and Urdu.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (size " 8x16 ") and " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Armenian
Supported language: Armenian.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.B Fixed
(all sizes).

.SS CyrAsia
This codeset supports some of the non-Slavic Cyrillic languages \-
Abkhazia, Avaric, Azerbaijani, Bashkir, Buryat, Chechen, Chuvash,
Inupiaq (Eskimo), Kara-Kalpak, Kazakh, Kirgiz, Komi, Kumyk, Kurdish,
Lezghian, Mari (Cheremis), Mongolian, Ossetic, Selkup
(Ostyak-Samoyed), Tajik, Tatar, Turkmen, Tuvinian, Uzbek and Yakut.
.P
Completely supported by the following font faces:
.B Fixed
(all sizes).

.SS CyrKoi
Supports entirely the 8-bit encodings KOI8-R and KOI8-U.  Suitable for
Russian and Ukrainian when one of these two encodings is used.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces (in all sizes):
.BR Fixed ", " Terminus ", " TerminusBold ", " TerminusBoldVGA " and " VGA .

.SS CyrSlav
Supports entirely the 8-bit encodings ISO-8859-5 and CP1251.  Suitable
the Slavic Cyrillic languages \- Belarusian, Bulgarian, Macedonian,
Russian, Serbian and Ukrainian.  For Serbian both the Cyrillic and the
Latin alphabets are supported.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (all sizes), " Terminus " (all sizes), " TerminusBold " (all sizes), " TerminusBoldVGA " (all sizes), " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Ethiopian (a big codeset)
Supports Amharic, Ethiopic (Geez), Tigre and Tigrinya.
.P
This codeset is partially covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (sizes " 8x15 " and " 8x18 "), " Goha " (all sizes) and " GohaClassic " (all sizes)."

.SS Georgian
Supported language: Georgian.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.B Fixed
(all sizes).

.SS Greek
Supported language: Greek.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (all sizes) and " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Hebrew
Supported languages: Hebrew and Yiddish.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (sizes " 8x13 ", " 8x15 ", " 8x16 " and " 8x18 ") and " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Lao
Supported languages: Lao.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (sizes " 8x15 " and " 8x16 ).

.SS Lat15
Covers entirely ISO-8859-1, ISO-8859-9 and ISO-8859-15.  Suitable for
the so called Latin1 and Latin5 languages \- Afar, Afrikaans,
Albanian, Aragonese, Asturian, Aymara, Basque, Bislama, Breton,
Catalan, Chamorro, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Faroese, Fijian, Finnish,
French, Frisian, Friulian, Galician, German, Hiri Motu, Icelandic,
Ido, Indonesian, Interlingua, Interlingue, Italian, Low Saxon, Lule
Sami, Luxembourgish, Malagasy, Manx Gaelic, Norwegian Bokmal,
Norwegian Nynorsk, Occitan, Oromo or Galla, Portuguese, Rhaeto-Romance
(Romansch), Scots Gaelic, Somali, South Sami, Spanish, Swahili,
Swedish, Tswana, Turkish, Volapuk, Votic, Walloon, Xhosa, Yapese and
Zulu.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (all sizes), " Terminus " (all sizes), " TerminusBold " (all sizes), " TerminusBoldVGA " (all sizes), " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Lat2
Covers entirely ISO-8859-2.  The Euro sign and the Romanian letters
with comma below are also supported.  Suitable for the so called
Latin2 languages \- Bosnian, Croatian, Czech, Hungarian, Polish,
Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian and Sorbian (lower and upper).
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (all sizes), " Terminus " (all sizes), " TerminusBold " (all sizes), " TerminusBoldVGA " (all sizes), " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Lat38
Covers entirely ISO-8859-3 and ISO-8859-14.  Suitable for Chichewa
Esperanto, Irish, Maltese and Welsh.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (all sizes) and " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Lat7
Covers entirely ISO-8859-13.  Suitable for Lithuanian, Latvian, Maori
and Marshallese.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (all sizes), " Terminus " (all sizes), " TerminusBold " (all sizes), " TerminusBoldVGA " (all sizes), " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Thai
Supported language: Thai.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.B Fixed
(all sizes).

.SS Uni1 (a big codeset)
Supports most of the Latin languages, the Slavic Cyrillic
languages, Hebrew and barely Arabic.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (sizes " 8x15 " and " 8x16 ") and " VGA " (all sizes)."

.SS Uni2 (a big codeset)
Supports most of the Latin languages, the Slavic Cyrillic languages
and Greek.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (all sizes) and " VGA " (sizes " 8x16 " and " 16x32 ).

.SS Uni3 (a big codeset)
Supports most of the Latin and Cyrillic languages.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.B Fixed
(all sizes).

.SS Vietnamese (a big codeset)
Supported language: Vietnamese.
.P
Completely covered by the following font faces:
.BR Fixed " (sizes " 8x13 ", " 8x15 ", " 8x16 " and " 8x18 ).

.SH FILES
The standard location of the
.B console-setup
configuration file is
.IR /usr/local/etc/default/console-setup .
The keyboard configuration is in
.IR /usr/local/etc/default/keyboard .
Fonts that can be used with the variable
.B FONT
are usually installed in
.IR /usr/share/consolefonts/ " or " /usr/share/syscons/fonts/ .
Translation maps that can be used with the variable CONSOLE_MAP are
usually installed in
.IR /usr/share/consoletrans/ " or " /usr/share/syscons/scrnmaps/ .

.SH NOTES
The aim of the Terminus font is to reduce the eyes-fatigue when one
has to read a lot.  Currently this font supports only the Latin, the
Cyrillic and the Greek scripts (the 
.BR Lat15 ", " Lat2 ", " Lat7 ", " CyrAsia ", " CyrKoi ", " CyrSlav ", " Greek ", " Uni2 " and " Uni3
codesets).
.P
The fonts with font face
.B TerminusBoldVGA
are optimized for use with regular text video modes.  They should not
be used with framebuffer video modes.  The fonts with font face
.B TerminusBold
are optimized for use with the framebuffer video modes.  The fonts
with font face
.B Terminus
can be used in all video modes.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR setupcon (1),
.BR keyboard (5),
.BR setfont (1),
.BR consolechars (1),
.BR vidcontrol (1)

